---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Discover how Charmed HPC rotates Slurm authentication and JWT keys for enhanced cluster security. Learn about the automated key rotation process and security best practices.
---

(explanation-key-rotation)=
# Key rotation

A Charmed HPC deployment uses two keys: the internal [authentication key](sack), to ensure
communications ["received by Slurm are coming from trusted sources"](https://slurm.schedmd.com/authentication.html), and a [standalone JWT key](https://slurm.schedmd.com/jwt.html) used for API token generation.

Both keys are generated by the `slurmctld` charm during installation and are securely
distributed to related Slurm using [Juju Secrets](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/explanation/juju-security/#secrets). The authentication key is distributed to charms: `sackd`, `slurmd`,
`slurmdbd`, and `slurmrestd`, while the JWT key is distributed to only `slurmdbd`.

The `slurmctld` application is the owner of the key charm secrets while the related Slurm charms are
secret observers.

It is good security practice to replace keys regularly or in response to security incidents to
ensure malicious users cannot use a leaked key to exert control over the cluster.

## Authentication key rotation process

The [Rotate the Slurm authentication key how-to](howto-manage-rotate-auth-key) provides the steps to initiate the key rotation process, using the `rotate-auth-key` action. The action triggers a cluster-wide rotation of the authentication key. Once the process is complete, a new key is in
place and the previous key can no longer be used to authenticate Slurm communication.

The full rotation process is as follows:

* A Charmed HPC cluster administrator runs `juju run slurmctld/leader rotate-auth-key`
* The `slurmctld` leader generates a new cryptographically secure key and adds it to its [`slurm.jwks` file](https://slurm.schedmd.com/authentication.html#multiple_key_setup) alongside the old key. To ensure this key
has a unique identifier, its key ID, or `kid`, value is set to a newly generated Universally Unique
Identifier (UUID).
* With the new key in place, the `slurmctld` leader performs an `scontrol reconfigure` to reload
configuration across the cluster. At this point, both the new and old keys are valid and can be used
for authentication.
* The `slurmctld` leader updates the Juju secret authentication key to a new revision with the new
key.
* The revision update triggers a `SecretChangedEvent` in each unit of the related Slurm charms (the secret observers).
* In the `SecretChangedEvent`, units read the new revision of the Juju secret then replace their
local key file with the new key and reload their service configuration. This ensures the new key is
in use and the old key is no longer valid on that unit.
* Once all units of related Slurm charms have updated to the new key, the `slurmctld` leader
receives a `SecretRemoveEvent`.
* In the `SecretRemoveEvent`, the `slurmctld` leader removes the old key from the slurm.jwks file
and performs another `scontrol reconfigure` to ensure the old key is no longer valid in the
cluster and only the new key is trusted for future authentication.

## JWT key rotation process

The [Rotate the JWT authentication key how-to](howto-manage-rotate-jwt-key) provides the steps
to initiate the key rotation process, using the `rotate-jwt-key` action. The action triggers a
rotation of the JWT key on both the `slurmctld` controller and `slurmdbd` database units. Once the
process is complete, a new key is in place and the previous key can no longer be used to generate
valid tokens.

The full rotation process is as follows:

* A Charmed HPC cluster administrator runs `juju run slurmctld/leader rotate-jwt-key`
* The `slurmctld` leader generates a new cryptographically secure key and replaces its existing
[`jwt_hs256.key`](https://slurm.schedmd.com/jwt.html#setup).
* With the new key in place, the `slurmctld` leader performs an `scontrol reconfigure` to reload
configuration across the cluster. `slurmdbd` is now using a stale key and its API endpoints are
inaccessible.
* The `slurmctld` leader updates the Juju secret JWT key to a new revision with the new key.
* The revision update triggers a `SecretChangedEvent` in the `slurmdbd` unit.
* In the `SecretChangedEvent`, the `slurmdbd` unit reads the new revision of the Juju secret then
replaces its local key file with the new key and reloads its service configuration. This ensures the
new key is in use and the old key is no longer valid.
* The API endpoints for `slurmdbd` are now accessible again.
